Chapter 3: Basic Concepts of RF and Radio Signals

Before diving into using the RTL-SDR dongle to receive and decode different types of radio signals, it is important to have a basic understanding of RF (radio frequency) and radio signals. This chapter will cover some fundamental concepts that will help you better understand and work with the signals you'll be receiving with your RTL-SDR dongle.

RF is a type of energy that travels through space in the form of electromagnetic waves. These waves are made up of oscillating electric and magnetic fields that oscillate at right angles to each other. The frequency of these oscillations is measured in hertz (Hz) and is what differentiates different types of RF signals. The frequency range of RF signals that can be received with an RTL-SDR dongle is typically between 24 MHz and 1.7 GHz.

Radio signals are a type of RF signal that are specifically designed to carry information. This information can be in the form of voice, data, or video. There are many different types of radio signals, each with its own unique characteristics and uses.

One of the most important concepts in understanding radio signals is modulation. Modulation is the process of encoding information onto a carrier signal. The carrier signal is a continuous wave that is modulated with the information to be transmitted. There are two main types of modulation: analog and digital.

Analog modulation is the process of encoding information onto a continuous wave by varying its amplitude, frequency, or phase. The most common types of analog modulation are AM (Amplitude Modulation) and FM (Frequency Modulation). AM is used to transmit information by varying the amplitude of the carrier signal, while FM is used to transmit information by varying the frequency of the carrier signal.

Digital modulation is the process of encoding information onto a carrier signal in the form of discrete digital symbols. Digital modulation is used to transmit digital data and is typically more efficient and robust than analog modulation. The most common types of digital modulation are PSK (Phase Shift Keying), QAM (Quadrature Amplitude Modulation), and OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing).

Another important concept in understanding radio signals is demodulation. Demodulation is the process of extracting the original information from a modulated signal. There are two main types of demodulation: analog and digital.

Analog demodulation is the process of extracting the original information from an analog modulated signal. This can be done by using a simple diode detector for AM signals or a frequency discriminator for FM signals.

Digital demodulation is the process of extracting the original information from a digital modulated signal. This can be done by using a digital demodulator, which is typically implemented in software. The digital demodulator analyzes the received signal and uses a mathematical algorithm to extract the original information.

Some common types of radio signals that can be received with the RTL-SDR dongle are:

FM radio
AM radio
NOAA weather radio
POCSAG and FLEX paging
GSM
ADS-B
AIS
Digital voice and audio signals (DMR, D-Star, P25)
In this chapter, we have covered:

The basics of RF and radio signals
Different types of modulation and demodulation
Common types of radio signals that can be received with the RTL-SDR dongle
By understanding these concepts, you'll have a better understanding of the signals you'll be working with and be better equipped to decode and analyze
